---
layout: post
title:  "Stats & HUD"
---

Here is the relevant [commit
range](https://github.com/PlanetLotus/keen5-linux/compare/f31a60e827bee4797a3405b0c35213fc27279730...74f79ecc77bd100dbf85a3203a5d9cbaba53d090)
for this feature.

I had a surprising amount of fun developing this feature.

### StatsManager

StatsManager is the "backend". It updates and returns values for the player's
score, number of lives, ammo, and vitalin. The idea is that other classes can
have a reference to the single StatsManager. The "Player" class both reads from
and updates the StatsManager. The "HUD" class just reads from it.

Something important is that StatsManager also keeps track of whether any given
value has changed for any particular loop (these values are reset to false
after the HUD reads from StatsManager). This helps avoid calculating
what the HUD should look like when it hasn't changed. Sadly, this doesn't
prevent any draw() calls because the entire screen is redrawn every frame.

### HUD

The HUD ("Heads-Up Display") is the "frontend" responsible for showing the
player what their score is, how many lives they have, and how much ammo they
have.

What was particularly tricky about this feature is that I don't have that
font that the actual game uses for the numerical values in the HUD. To make up
for this I took screenshots of each value (0-9, as well as a grayed-out 8) and
put them in a few frames that the HUD then reads from. This is incredibly
inefficient because now I'm adding a draw() call for every single digit in the
HUD, but I wanted it to look like the actual game and this was kind of
interesting.

When I mentioned calculating what the HUD should look like earlier, this is
what I was talking about. I had to write a method that takes a value, say a
score, and chop it up digit-by-digit and show the corresponding image for that
digit on the HUD. This brought me back to some first-quarter Computer Science
stuff where I had to process each digit in a larger number at a time. To get
the least-significant digit, just take the value and mod it by 10. Then, to
look at the next digit, divide the value by 10 to chop off the digit you just
looked at.

{% highlight cpp %}
void Hud::updateProperty(int value, int minClipIndex, int maxClipIndex) {
    int clipIndex = maxClipIndex;
    int digits = value;
    int digit = 0;
    bool isDigitZeroAndMostSigificantDigit = false;
    bool isValueZeroButNotDigit = false;

    while (clipIndex >= minClipIndex) {
        digit = digits % 10;

        isDigitZeroAndMostSigificantDigit = digit == 0 && digits / 10 == 0;
        isValueZeroButNotDigit = digit != 0 || clipIndex != maxClipIndex;

        if (isDigitZeroAndMostSigificantDigit && isValueZeroButNotDigit) {
            valueSrcClips[clipIndex] = &grayEightClip;
        } else {
            valueSrcClips[clipIndex] = clipsByDigit[digit];
        }

        digits /= 10;
        clipIndex--;
    }
}
{% endhighlight %}

The draw code was kind of complex too. I made sure to add a ton of const ints
in the header file to make it very clear what each value represents. The draw
code involves lots of offsets for positioning both the HUD background as well
as the 13(!!!) individual digits that go on top of it.

### VirtualBox

Speaking of the draw code, I noticed (yes, actually noticed) a performance drop
when I added all of these draw calls. I was pretty certain that my game wasn't
doing enough to really cause such a slowdown, and that my computer is plenty
powerful enough to handle this. I've long suspected VirtualBox (Running Lubuntu
14.04) slows down my game noticeably, and while developing this feature
I looked into it in more detail.

The first thing I did was pop open the task manager and noticed the game was
using 35% of the guest CPU. That seemed unreasonable for such a small game. I
went into VirtualBox and turned on 3D Acceleration. Now when I ran the game, I
got a TON of OpenGL warnings, but the game did run. It also ran smoothly! Task
manager showed 10% usage after this change. Very significant and a lot more
reasonable. I attributed the rest not really to game code but just overhead in
the virtual machine plus SDL overhead. Man, those OpenGL warnings were annoying
though. I spent about an hour googling trying to fix this and confirmed that it
is a bug in VirtualBox since Ubuntu 14.04. Not much I can do there.

I was content with leaving 3D Acceleration on, enjoying the better performance,
and just ignoring the full page of OpenGL warnings until I went to record a
demo video for this blog post. Turns out VirtualBox doesn't like my recording
software when 3D Acceleration is turned on, or vice versa. After turning it
back off it works fine, but you may actually notice a tiny bit of framerate
drop in my video because of that. I'm sorry, I know you pay a lot for these
demos.

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/uE-eSZFk9sk" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>
